---
title: Useful Vim commands
date: '2022-03-09'
slug: vim-command
---

# Vim commands

## Normal mode to insert mode

- `i`: insert text just before the cursor.
- `I`: insert text at the start of the line.
- `a`: append text just after the cursor.
- `A`: append text at the end of the line.
- `o`: open a new line below.
- `O`: open a new line above.
- `s`: substitute the current character.
- `S`: substitute the current line.
- `r`: replace the current character.
- `R`: replace continuous characters.

## Move cursor around

- `0`: move to the start of the line.
- `^`: move to the first non-blank character of the line.
- `$`: move to the end of the line.
- `ctrl-b`: move back one screen.
- `ctrl-f`: move forward one screen.
- `H`: jump as high as possible, i.e. the first line of the window.
- `M`: jump to the middle of the window.
- `L`: jump to the lowest line of the window.
- `G`: jump to the end of the file.
- `1G` or `gg`: jump to the start of the file.
- `30G`: jump to line 30.
- `w`: move to the start of next word. 2w move two words.
- `e`: move to the end of next word.
- `b`: move backward one word.
- `(`: move to previous sentence.
- `)`: move to next sentence.
- `{`: move to previous paragraph
- `J`: move to next paragraph.
- `ctrl-o`: jump backward to previous location.
- `ctrl-i`: jump forward to next location.
- `ma`: mark current position, then move to other places and use `'a` (single quote then a) to come back to the start of the marked line, or you can use '`a' (backtick and a) to jump to exact place. You can also use `mb` and '`b', i.e. any letters a-z A-Z.
- `%`: jump to corresponding item, e.g. from left brace to the right brace

## Visual mode

- `v` then `ap`: (a paragraph) choose a paragraph where the curson is on.
- `y` then `aw`: choose the word where the cursor is on.
- `u` then `a"`: choose the whole quoted word/sentence where the cursor is within.
- `u` then `ab`: choose a block of text, i.e. within parathese, brakets, etc.
- `~`: switch cases of letters, i.e. upper to lower, lower to upper.
- `V`: visual mode with lines.

## Edit text

- `d`: delete and put text into clipboard. 
- `dd`: delete the current line. 
- `dl` or `x`: delete the current letter where the cursor is. 
- `dw`: delete a word where the cursor is. 
- `d$`: delete text after the cursor of the current line. 
- `d0`: delete text before the cursor of the current line. 
- `dh`, `dj`, `dk`, `d2ap`, `d2w`, `d31`, `24h`, `d5j`, etc. Combine number with options. 
- `y`: yank or copy text 
- `yy`: yank the current line. 
- `yap`: yank the current paragraph 
- `p`: paste text after cursor position. 
- `P`: paste text before cursor position. 
- `xp`: cut then paste after cursor, so swap two characters. 
- `dwwP`: cut one word, move to next word, paste before that word, so swap two words 
- `.`: repeat last action. If you want to repeat a series of actions, use `qa` to start recording a macro, then do changes, then press `q` to stop recording, in another line, use `Ca` to do same changes on that line. Or `qb`, `qc`, etc. 
- `u`: undo the last change. 
- `ctrl-r`: redo the undo. 
- `:earlier 5m`: back to five minutes ago, i.e. time machine.. 
- `:later 45s`: forward in time... 
- `:undo 5`: undo the last five changes. 
- `:noh`: no highlight after search. 
- `:undolist`: view the undo tree. 

## Search

- `/word`: to move to the first occurrence of word.
- `n`: go to next occurrence.
- `N`: go to previous occurrence.
- `/\<word\>`: search word exactly.
- `/\d\*`: search 0 or more digit (s).

## Search and replace

- `:S/search/replace/g`: search and replace in current line.
- `:%S/search/replace/g`: search and replace in all lines.
- `:%S/search/replace/gc`: ask for confirmation

## Multiple files

### Multiple sections

- `:set foldmethod=indent`, then at indent line, `ze` to close the fold (compress), `zo` to open the fold, or `za` to switch between close and open, alternate.

### Multiple files

- `:edit file1`, `:e file2`, then use `:b 1` to go to file l, `:b 2` to file 2. _b_ means buffer. `:ls` to show all editing files.

### Multiple windows

- `:new`: to open a new window.
- `ctrl-w h/j/k/l` or `ctrl-w ctrl-w`: to move among windows.
- `:sp`: to split current window. or use `ctrl-w s`.
- `:vsp`: to split vertical window, or use `ctrl-w v`.
- `ctrl-w r`: to rotate positions of windows.
- `ctrl-w K`: move current window to topmost position.
- `:resize 10` or `resize -10`: change window size to display 10 more/less lines.
- `ctrl-w _`: increase current window size as much as possible.
- `ctrl-w =`: make all windows same size.

### Multiple tabs

- `:tabnew`: to open a new tab
- `gt`: go to next tab.
- `gT`: go to previous tab.
- `:tabmove`: to reorder tabs, e.g. `:tabmove O` moves the current tab to the first position.

## Others

- `:!`: to run shell commands within vim.
